---
title: 'Construct a Amortization Table using R'
date: 2023-12-08
permalink: /posts/2023/12/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Financial Economics
---
Imagine you're eyeing this $600,000 house, right? Now, you're thinking, "Let's do this! I'll grab a 30-year fixed mortgage with an annual rate of 5%, and I'll throw down a 20% down payment." But then, the real questions hit you: What's the monthly hit gonna be? And how much of that is heading to interest, and how much is actually chipping away at the house itself? Curious, right?

It's crucial to note that, in Canada, all mortgages (excluding variable rate mortgages) are compounded semi-annually by law. Thus, a mortgage quoted at 5% will have an annual effective rate of 5.06%, based on a 2.5% semi-annual rate:

$$( 1 + 0.025)^2 -1 = 0.0506 $$

However, you make your interest payments monthly, so your mortgage lender needs to use a monthly rate based on an annual rate that is less than 5%. Why? Because this rate will get compounded monthly. Therefore, we need to find the rate that compounded monthly, results in an effective annual rate of 5.06%. Mathematically, this would be:

$$(1+ r_M)^{12} -1 = 0.0506$$

$$r_M = (1.0506)^{\frac {1} {12}}-1$$

$$r_M = 0.0041219243$$

$$0.0041219243 \times 12 = 4.9463%$$ 

In other words, 4.9463% compounded monthly is 5.06% annually. 

## Calculate the Monthly Mortgage Payment

Here is the present value of annuity. An annuity involves paying a constant amount of money (C) at regular intervals for a specified period.  One of the typical example of annuity is mortgage. We can use the following formula to figure out the monthly mortgage payment.  

$$ PV = \frac{C}{r} - \frac{C}{r} \times \frac{1}{(1+r)^T} = C \times \frac{1}{r} \bigg[1-\frac{1}{(1+r)^T}\bigg] $$

Given that the loan amount (PV) is 480,000, the effective period rate (r) is 0.412%, and the number of payments/periods is $12 \times 30 = 360$, the monthly mortgage payment would be

$$C = PV \times r \times \frac{1}{1-\frac{1}{(1+r)^T}}  = 2560.341 $$

## R code

```{R}
library(FinancialMath)

tab1 <- amort.table(Loan=480000,n=360, i=0.06,ic=2,pf=12,plot=FALSE)  

```

Over the 30-year amortization period, you will: 
- have made 360 monthly payments of $2,561.72.
- have paid $480,000.00 in principal, $442,217.49 in interest, for a total of $922,217.49.
